# Anti-Racist Archival Description Annotated Bibliography

The Archives for Black Lives in Philadelphia (A4BLiP) Anti-Racist Description Working Group aims to provide archivists and other memory workers resources and a framework with which to approach description creation and revision. In particular, it seeks to address the othering and rendered invisibility of Black people in the archives, which persists today and continues to reinforce and normalize the white supremacist patriarchal society our archives reflect.<sup>[1](#myfootnote1)</sup> New descriptive practices of underrepresented groups have in recent years been elevated to a national platform due to the work of cultural heritage practitioners and members of the public alike. La Tanya S. Autry, Curator of Art and Civil Rights at Mississippi Museum of Art created the [Social Justice and Museums Resource List](https://www.aam-us.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Social-Justice-Resources-for-Musuems.pdf); many archival repositories are partnering with underrepresented communities to build collections like the [Plateau Peoples’ Web Portal](https://plateauportal.libraries.wsu.edu/) and [Project STAND](https://standarchives.com/); and communities and activists are creating their own collections using digital humanities tools like the [Chicana por Mi Raza Digital Memory Collective](https://chicanapormiraza.org/), [DocNow](https://www.docnow.io/), [A People’s Archive of Police Violence in Cleveland](https://www.archivingpoliceviolence.org/), and the [Borderlands Archives Cartography](https://www.bacartography.org/). The A4BLiP Anti-Racist Description Working Group hopes to contribute to the archival community’s efforts to programmatically adopt ethical and inclusive description practices.

The citations included here represent a subset of titles selected from an extensive bibliography created and maintained by the Working Group. They focus on major  themes and issues found in recent literature on archives and librarianship that critique descriptive theory and practice, including the concept of provenance
and descriptive standards. These sources emphasize the role information professionals play and the power they wield in creating records, naming, and storytelling; and thus their participation in perpetuating, intentionally or not, oppressive structures and power dynamics. While the focus of this Working Group is to specifically address anti-Black description, the group attempted to include a number of resources on the ways in which archives oppress and erase through description and how archivists can change those practices. This meant including articles that do not focus specifically on Black experiences or collections, but that address other aspects of identity that have been erased in the archives. By doing so, our intention is not to collapse the various axes on which individuals experience oppression, often in intersecting ways. The group acknowledges that to experience oppression based on race is not the same as to experience oppression based on gender, sexuality, class, or ability, nor are any of these the same as experiencing oppression based on multiple identities at once. With this in mind, this bibliography includes some resources that are not specific to Black communities with the goal of seeking shared strategies, when appropriate, from those doing anti-oppressive description work in other areas.

<a name="myfootnote1">[1]</a>: Thank you to Dorothy Berry and Jasmine Clark for suggesting that we provide more detail about how archives have reinforced a
white supremacist patriarchal society by erasing and othering marginalized groups.

**Arroyo-Ramirez, Elvia, Molly Brown, Dinah Handel, Jasmine Jones, Shannon O’Neill, Rachel Mattson, Giordana Mecagni, Holly Smith, and Kelly Wooten.“Radical Empathy in Archival Practice.” Presentation, Society of American Archivists Annual Meeting, Portland, OR, July 2017.[https://archives2017.sched.com/event/ABGy/301-radical-empathy-in-archival-practice](https://archives2017.sched.com/event/ABGy/301-radical-empathy-in-archival-practice)**

Breakout session notes:
[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rYjZop2Hphd_796QBDm-8GV3rHRLX4H1U7noFzdrGl/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rYjZop2Hphd_796QBDm-8GV3rHRLX4H1U7noFzdrGl/edit)

Mini-zine: [https://drive.google.com/file/d/1LryGuU1blZpk1Ts2L3nfNe40NY1Ck82r/view](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1LryGuU1blZpk1Ts2L3nfNe40NY1Ck82r/view)

At SAA 2017, a group of nine archivists delivered lightning talks and facilitated a dialogue in response to Michelle Caswell and Marika Cifor’s article “From Human Rights to Feminist Ethics: Radical Empathy in Archives.” Presentations touched on ethical collaboration and partnerships, secondary trauma and suspended grief, archival education and horizontal mentorship, vendor control of marginalized histories, and emotional labor, among other topics. The speakers collectively posited a fifth affective relationship, the relationship between archivist and archivist, in addition to the four outlined by Caswell and Cifor. While many of the talks were relevant to an ethical approach towards description, of particular relevance for this project is Holly Smith’s discussion of her work documenting the history of Black women at Spelman College, in which she provided strategies for how archivists can responsibly collaborate with and document diverse communities without co-opting their voices. Giordana Mecagni’s talk also critiqued institutions that purchase and digitize materials documenting the histories of Black, activist, and other marginalized communities only to keep them behind a paywall, arguing instead for decolonized digital archives that are accountable to the communities they document. Breakout session notes include strategies discussed by small groups about how to apply radical empathy and an ethics of care to various aspects of their work as archivists.

**Berry, Dorothy. “Digitizing and Enhancing Description Across Collections to Make African American Materials More Discoverable on Umbra Search African American History.” The Design for Diversity Learning Toolkit. (2018). https://des4div.library.northeastern.edu/digitizing-and-enhancing-description-across-collections-to-make-african-american-materials-more-discoverable-on-umbra-search-african-american-history/**

Berry presents a case study on a project undertaken at University of Minnesota Libraries to digitize and enhance description of African American materials through the aggregated Umbra Search African American History platform. She describes challenges surrounding locating materials related to African Americans, making decisions about whether to use problematic subject headings in order to support access, rights management, MPLP processing approaches, and the need to sometimes defy traditional archival description practices in order to appropriately contextualize materials within search aggregator displays. Berry’s case study also embodies a critique of the archival principle of provenance: she notes, the “digital landscape provides an opportunity to look at materials outside the context of their collections without having to physically re-order, disrupting concepts of respect des fonds which historically favor people with the power and privilege to securely store and collect materials over time.”

**Brown, Richard Harvey, and Beth Davis-Brown. “The Making of Memory: The Politics of Archives, Libraries and Museums in the Construction of National Consciousness.” History of the Human Sciences, 11 (1998): 17-32, [doi.org/10.1177/095269519801100402](http://doi.org/10.1177/095269519801100402).**

This article details the political choices archives, libraries, and museums wrestle with by providing examples of how national institutions have responded to the challenge of balancing ethical and moral questions surrounding the “politics of memory” with the more practical or “technical” concerns of operating a
cultural heritage center. Th e authors focus on the power structures that infl uence the library, archive, and museum (LAM) community of professionals and the daily activities of running such institutions, concluding that “technical activities always are political, at least latently or potentially, even when they are not contested and made explicitly political.” In the section on descriptive issues, Brown and Davis-Brown critique cataloging and classification systems for the ways in which they assume neutrality rather than accounting for the fact that they reflect dominant paradigms, as well as for their inability to keep up with cultural change. They also challenge LAM professionals to make “political choices” about “allocating resources to keep up with new paradigms by reclassifying older material, or to invest in gathering new material to be classifi ed according to the older system.”

**Caswell, Michelle. “Teaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives,” The Library Quarterly 87, no. 3 (July 2017): 222-235, [doi.org/10.1086/692299](http://doi.org/10.1086/692299).**

In this article, Caswell discusses concrete ways in which archivists can recognize and work to dismantle white supremacy in the archives per a class exercise she developed for her students. In terms of descriptive practices, the author suggests several approaches, including archivists educating themselves about the
communities they describe; collaborating with communities to incorporate language they would use to describe themselves and compensating them for such work; hiring more archivists of color to do descriptive work; updating language in outdated finding aids and maintaining a record of such changes for review; hiring multi-linguists as archivists to author or translate fi nding aids into appropriate languages; and incorporating language courses in information science programs and as part of continuing education initiatives.

**Caswell, Michelle, and Marika Cifor. “From Human Rights to Feminist Ethics: Radical Empathy in the Archives.” Archivaria. 81 (Spring 2016), pp. 23-43. https://archivaria.ca/archivar/index.php/archivaria/article/view/13557.**

Caswell and Cifor state that social justice in the archives has been addressed only through a legal rightsbased framework, but insist that a feminist-ethics framework of care and connection should replace it. Th e concept of radical empathy -- a willingness to be aff ected and shaped by another’s experience without appropriating the experiences of others -- should inform archival decision-making. Through this model, archivists would acknowledge the “relationships of care” that they build with creators, subjects, and users of records, and would thoughtfully describe records based on what language the creator would use and how that language would affect communities invested in the record. The article asks the archival community to open itself to a theoretical shift in how we describe, how we appraise and accession, and in who we perceive as our users. 

**Cifor, Marika. “Aligning Bodies: Collecting, Arranging, and Describing Hatred for a Critical Queer Archives.”
Library Trends 64, no. 4 (2016): 756-775, https://muse.jhu.edu/.**

Cifor’s paper identifies and criticises the effective erasure of meaning and affect in the archives through the use of distant or removed language for description, especially when that language does not align with the intent and politics of a collection. In particular, Cifor discusses the ‘affect’ -- defined by Cifor as a force that creates a relationship, conscious or otherwise -- that description can create or remove, framing this around the description of hate mail in an LGBT collection. The items were described by Cifor in “the ways I believed a professional archivist should” rather than by how the community would experience and describe them. This description removed the aff ect a user would experience and apply to their understanding of a collection, creating a ‘false distance’, and potentially hiding these affects. Cifor offers some examples of queer community-based archival description that describes hate mail and indeed, hatred, in a way that account for the aff ect the material would have on creators and subjects. The article acknowledges that it is just a first step, and that many case studies that explore its concepts will be necessary in order to learn how to apply them to archival practice.

**Douglas, Jennifer. “Toward More Honest Description.” American Archivist. 79:1 (Spring/Summer 2016): 26-55, [doi.org/10.17723/0360-9081.79.1.26](http://doi.org/10.17723/0360-9081.79.1.26).**

Douglas urges archivists to be more transparent about how collections are constructed including information about a collection’s history as well as the intellectual and physical arrangement imposed upon it by creators and archivists. She notes that archivists have largely failed to make visible suffi cient information about the evolution and construction of collections, especially their own interpretive role, due to “conventions in archival theory and practice that encourage archivists to present a more perfect picture of the fonds, one that is consistent with traditional notions of archives as impartial and natural and of archivists as objective and neutral.” She also notes how the standardization of description has lent itself to “deceptive simplicity,” arguing that it contributes to the passive, neutral tone of fi nding aids. To counter this issue, the author suggests including information about the constructedness of collections, including the archivist’s role in fi nding aids by utilizing custodial history and arrangement notes, and/or in supplemental documentation or “parallel texts” such as essays, footnotes, appendices, and colophons. She suggests archivists make better use of and prioritize existing descriptive standards or perhaps revise existing content standards to add new elements that allow for more robust and visible information about the history, or life cycle, of collections. Douglas also suggests archivists avoid using passive voice.

**Drabinski, Emily. “Queering the Catalog: Queer Theory and the Politics of Correction.” The Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, 83, no. 2 (April 2013): 94-111, http://jstor.org/stable/10.1086/669547.**

In this article, Drabinski uses queer theory to critique a corrective approach to addressing problematic cataloging and classification issues. She encourages pedagogical interventions by librarians to help users interpret and critique these structures for themselves and other “queer interventions” that “highlight and make visible the contingency of cataloging decisions.” This article could be read as an argument for why it is important to retain a record of old terms and biased description even as society progresses, so users can understand how language evolves and how bias was perpetuated over time.

**Drake, Jarrett M. “RadTech Meets RadArch: Towards A New Principle for Archives and Archival Description.” Paper presented at the Radcliffe Workshop on Technology & Archival Processing, April 2016, Cambridge, MA, https://medium.com/on-archivy/radtech-meets-radarch-towards-a-new-principle-for-archives-andarchival-description-568f133e4325.**

In this presentation, Drake critiques the concept of provenance (respect des fonds) and argues that due to its origins in 19th-century Western society-defined by colonialism, imperialism, and patriarchy-the principle is fraught with such biases and stuck in these narrowly-defined and elitist constructs. He emphasizes how technology, in particular the prevalence of born-digital records, is highlighting the limits of provenance in terms of shared creation and custody of documentation in the technical sense; and in a social sense, providing opportunities for individuals who previously did not have the ability to create records and name themselves. Drake argues that continued reliance on and adherence to this flawed and antiquated principle as a central tenet of archival practice and description entrenches the profession in colonialist, racist, and sexist practices. He calls for the development of new archival principle(s) to guide archival practice and description, and urges that this development occur “beyond the bounds of the archival profession” using an intersectional approach. He suggests that description should not be conducted in a top-down/colonialist manner; instead, this work should be more collaborative where creators are able to describe themselves and their records, and assert their own names or not.

**Duff, Wendy, and Verne Harris. “Stories and Names: Archival Description as Narrating Records and Constructing Meanings,” Archival Science 2 (2002): 263-285,
http://yalearchivalreadinggroup.pbworks.com/f/Duff&Harris.pdf.**

Duff and Harris call for a liberatory, creative, and flexible approach to archival description, one that moves beyond fonds and series-based systems, the two primary descriptive architectures, which the authors conclude are limited and insufficient. Taking a decidedly postmodernist view, they encourage archivists to acknowledge their inherent subjectivity as actors of a particular place and time and their role as records creators. These realities speak to the power archivists have wielded in purposefully or inadvertently perpetuating and replicating oppressive power relations through the records and stories they help preserve and narrate; records and stories, the authors contend, that are continually constructed. Duff and Harris encourage archivists to critique and
problematize the basic tenets and concepts of the profession, in particular provenance and standardization and how they contribute to the inability of archivists to move beyond the violence that current archival practice perpetuates. They conclude that a new approach to archival description should be one “hospitable to deconstruction,” that does the following: prioritizes transparency where archival intervention, archivists’ biases, and the use of records are documented; takes all categories of users and their needs into account allows users to contribute their own stories; encourages archivists’ engagement with marginalized and silenced communities; interrogates its own “de facto functioning as a medium of metanarrative.”

**Dunbar, Anthony W. “Introducing Critical Race Theory to Archival Discourse: Getting the Conversation Started.” Archival Science 6. no.1 (March 2006): 109-129, [doi.org/10.1007/s10502-006-9022-6](http://doi.org/10.1007/s10502-006-9022-6).**

Dunbar focuses on three Critical Race Theory (CRT) methodological concepts: counterstories/counternarrative, microaggressions, and social justice. These concepts can guide the archival profession by teaching archivists to identify bias within a record’s content, context, and structure. This theory framework would challenge archivists to recognize who fills the roles of documenter vs. documented, and understand the power and agency that comes along with each role. When applying CRT to archival practice, archivists should identify culturally-constructed categories and build a counternarrative; recognize microaggressions in collections and interpretation; and actively bring multiple perspectives to the forefront of archival discourse.

**Fuentes, Marisa J. *Dispossessed Lives: Enslaved Women, Violence, and the Archive.* Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016.**

In her book, Marisa Fuentes takes archival fragments of stories of enslaved women in Barbados, most specifi cally in Bridgetown, and reconstructs them. Th rough these reconstructions, she explores the ways in which archives silence Black women’s voices and presence in history and keep them hidden underneath a dominant white imperialist narrative reinforced by the historical record. Fuentes delves into these archival fragments to reveal the violence and control visited upon enslaved Black women in an urban context, and models how we should read past the white male narrative and look for the architecture of oppression on Black women revealed in the record fragments -- and understand their choices and lives based on that context.

**Hogan, Kristen. “Breaking Secrets” in the Catalog: Proposing the Black Queer Studies Collection at the University of Texas at Austin.” Progressive Librarian 34 (Fall 2010): 50-57, http://progressivelibrariansguild.org/PL/PL34_35/050.pdf.**

Hogan describes the need for an intersectional approach to critical cataloging, one that creates and preserves context and that removes barriers created by traditional information organization practices, especially categorization and naming. Creating virtual collections, a practice presented using the Black Queer Studies Collection at UT Austin, is an option that allows catalogers to create significant context for materials without physically removing them to one location, which limits them to a single category. Hogan also points out that displaying relationships in records about who assigned and created vocabularies would acknowledge the power of naming in the record itself. The essay provides a case study for those who would like to follow the model of virtual collections, and also points out the challenges that arose in proposing the project, illuminating that buy-in is essential to changing practice. 

**Hughes-Watkins, Lae’l. “Moving Toward a Reparative Archive: A Roadmap for a Holistic Approach to Disrupting Homogenous Histories in Academic Repositories and Creating Inclusive Spaces for Marginalized Voices,” Journal of Contemporary Archival Studies. 5.6. (2018), https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/jcas/vol5/iss1/6.**

In this article, Hughes-Watkins presents a theoretical and practical framework for creating a “reparative archive,” while presenting as a case study the Black Campus Movement (BCM) Collection Development Project Initiative at Kent State University. Building on a literature review of recent scholarship on social justice and community archives, she critiques archival practices at mainstream institutions, academic repositories in particular, which have historically focused on documenting those with wealth and power, thereby creating a “systemic defect within traditional archives that has led to the marginalization, erasure, and oppression of historically underrepresented communities.” Hughes-Watkins defines “reparative” as work that institutions who have historically disenfranchised certain communities can conduct as a means of materially repairing for past actions. While her case study focuses primarily on acquisition, advocacy, and utilization, her framework is also readily applicable to reparative approaches to description work.

**Iacovino, Livia. “Rethinking Archival, Ethical and Legal Frameworks for records of Indigenous Australian Communities: A Participant Relationship Model of Rights and Responsibilities.” Archival Science. 10, no. 4 (December 2010): 353-372, [doi.org/10.1007/s10502-010-9120-3](http://doi.org/10.1007/s10502-010-9120-3).**

Iacovino argues for a more participatory model of archiving, one in which the subjects revealed in collections, not just the ‘creators’, are given agency and ownership of records in which their information and knowledge is found. In the participant model, the creator of a collection is no longer acknowledged as the only source of the records. This argument is framed around the effort in Australia to perform legal and archival reform of records regarding Indigenous Australian communities. The legal framework does not account for subjects of records to have significant rights of ownership, impeding change and positioning subjects as having no influence on their own information. Iacovino presents a strong case for a participant model for archives, expanding beyond its application to Indigenous Australians, while also acknowledging the barriers in place that challenge the process to change traditional archival ideas of ownership.

**Kapitan, Alex. Radical Copyeditor (blog), https://radicalcopyeditor.com/.**

Alex Kapitan’s blog is dedicated to providing examples of radical copyediting: how to use more sensitive language, be more aware of context, and take greater care with description. The blog addresses topics like white supremacy, “person-first” language, self-identification, and also features a dedicated Transgender Style Guide. One of the primary principles of the blog is to acknowledge the impact of language and take the steps necessary to avoid harm. While not directly related to archival description, there are many useful examples that can be applied to finding aid narratives. The one weakness of the blog could be that it is difficult to tell where Kapitan is building their style guides from: personal experience, anecdotes, or directly from the communities they describe.

**Kaplan, Elisabeth. “‘Many Paths to Partial Truths’: Archives, Anthropology, and the Power of Representation.” Archival Science 2, no. 3 (2002): 209-220, [doi.org/10.1007/BF02435622](http://doi.org/10.1007/BF02435622).**

Kaplan compares the archival and anthropological fields, citing the similar roles of their practitioners as would-be impartial selectors who nevertheless hold  power over representation and influence interpretation. Through writings from the anthropological field, Kaplan posits that the isolation of the archival profession and its reluctance to move away from a positivist to a postmodernist approach has caused it to fall behind other disciplines in the humanities and social sciences. Kaplan places focus on the changes the anthropological field has pursued in power and authorship and encourages the archival field to do the same. The article offers a high-level critique and does not offer specific methods with which these changes might be made.

**Larade, Sharon, and Johanne Pelletier. “Mediating in a Neutral Environment: Gender-Inclusive or Neutral Language in Archival Descriptions” Archivaria, 35 (1992): 99-109, https://archivaria.ca/index.php/archivaria/article/view/11889/12842.**

Rather than lay out a “blueprint for future ‘safe’ language” the authors create a discussion space for archivists to contemplate their responsibility and responses to linguistic changes. The authors provide an overview of how the United States and Canada have responded linguistically to second wave feminist critiques of sexist terminology and syntax. Yet, with all of these changes and challenges to language the questions remains for archivists: do the criteria for implementing descriptive standards create invisible barriers to the process of incorporating new terminologies? As language continues to evolve and more marginalized groups describe themselves in their own voice, how does the field move the responsibility off the shoulders of individual archives and archivists?

**Light, Michelle, and Tom Hyry. “Colophons and Annotations: New Directions for the Finding Aid,” American Archivist 65, no. 2 (2002): 216-230, [doi.org/10.17723/aarc.65.2.l3h27j5x8716586q](http://doi.org/10.17723/aarc.65.2.l3h27j5x8716586q).**

In order to transform the finding aid, which “privileges the fi rst reading of a collection, arresting its evolution at a particular moment in time,” into something more transparent and permeable, Light and Hyry suggest archivists add colophons and annotations to description. Colophons, they explain, would serve as a means for archivists to be more transparent and document their role as active participants in the shaping of the historical record by including information about their editorial contributions, even providing biographical information about themselves, as well as information about a collection’s history and provenance. Annotations, the authors point out, could expand the scope of finding aids (and perhaps even change them entirely) by allowing users the opportunity to contribute their own interpretations, thus incorporating subsequent or alternate readings of collection materials.

**Littletree, Sandra, and Cheryl A. Metoyer. “Knowledge Organization from an Indigenous Perspective: The Mashantucket Pequot Thesaurus of American Indian Terminology Project,” Cataloging and Classification Quarterly 53 (2015): 640-657, [doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2015.1010113](http://doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2015.1010113).**

This case study regarding the Mashantucket Pequot Thesaurus of American Indian Terminology Project is an excellent example of how understanding the perspectives of described communities is essential to discovery and research of the materials. The knowledge organization project was based on indigenous philosophies and perspectives in recognition and response to the inadequate use of English language controlled vocabularies to describe American Indian subjects. Littletree and Metoyer provide examples of how existing vocabularies have failed researchers and subjects alike, describe the creation and foundation of the Thesaurus, and identify future research areas. This is a useful example that could be modeled to improve descriptive practices and create thoughtful vocabularies.

**Long, Kara, Santi Thompson, Sarah Potvin & Monica Rivero. “The “Wicked Problem” of Neutral Description: Toward a Documentation Approach to Metadata Standards.” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 55, no. 3 (2017): 107-128, [doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2016.1278419](http://doi.org/10.1080/01639374.2016.1278419).**

In this article, the authors use Horst W. J. Rittel and Melvin M. Webber’s framework of “wicked problems,” which posits that problems and solutions are ever-changing, and instead of focusing on a static solution, people should focus on the best solution for the time. The authors urge librarians, archivists, and information scientists to be explicit and document their framing and assumptions when creating metadata standards to dispel the myth of neutrality. To further transparency in creating standards, they argue that creators should publish their framing alongside their standard.

**Luster, Dominique, Abdi Roble, Ellen Engseth, and Athena Jackson. “Culture, Competencies, and Colleagues: a Cafe on divers\*” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society of American Archivists, Portland, OR, July 2017, http://sched.co/ABGn.**

At the 2017 SAA session, “Culture, Competencies, and Colleagues: a Cafe on divers*,” Luster presented the framework of conscious language and descriptive practices she used as the Teenie Harris Archivist. The Teenie Harris collection, a photographic collection which is available online, has titles that describe an image minutely. An issue Luster noticed was the lack of humanity in these descriptive titles and archival description practices in general.

Conscious language was described in this session as follows:
conscious language = kind language + compassionate language + mindful language + empowering language + respectful language + inclusive language

It takes into account the many intersections of identities humans can occupy: ability and disability, age, appearance, empowerment, ethnicity and race and nationality, gender and sex and sexuality, and health. 
