## Background

[Archives for Black Lives in Philadelphia (A4BLiP)](https://archivesforblacklives.wordpress.com/) is a loose association of archivists, librarians, and allied professionals in the Philadelphia and Delaware Valley area responding to the issues raised by the Black Lives Matter movement. One of its working groups, the Anti-Racist Description Working Group, is addressing anti-oppressive archival description. The project was inspired by Teressa Raiford, a Portland-based activist and founder of the organization Don’t Shoot PDX, who collaborated with A4BLiP on a conference presentation at the Society of American Archivists Annual Meeting in Portland, Oregon in 2017. 

The working group, made up of mostly white women and professionals who work at predominantly white institutions (PWIs), have created metadata recommendations for archival professionals to address racist and anti-Black archival description. The recommendations are intended to combat the racist structures inherent in PWIs and in archival description of underrepresented and marginalized groups, in particular those in the Black community. Th is project came about to improve our work as (predominantly white) archivists who handle collections about, by, and for people of the Black diaspora.

The metadata recommendations were informed by a bibliography of sources members created at the outset of the project. Recognizing that this issue is neither new nor solved, the bibliography serves to gather and amplify the work of archivists across the field who are already theorizing and practicing anti-oppressive archival description. The group incorporated some of these works into an annotated bibliography meant to serve as a supplement to the recommendations. The metadata recommendations and bibliography are tools the working group hopes will help deepen understanding of the complex issue of describing marginalized communities and groups. 

Due to the aforementioned nature of this working group (consisting of mostly white women), and in order to get community input, A4BLiP established a GoFundMe last December and successfully raised over $1,000 to pay Black archivists to review the recommendations and annotated bibliography before publishing. We thank the 28 individuals who donated to this fund. Potential reviewers were nominated by working group members (several are people with whom members have professional and/or personal relationships). Nine individuals, including archivists and allied professionals, ultimately reviewed the documents and offered feedback, which the working group then incorporated. The feedback we received during the review process was extraordinarily insightful, constructive, and essential to the success of this project. Thank you.

Like much of archival practice, this project and the work the group has produced is iterative. The resources the working group has created are by no means exhaustive, and the recommendations we make should be regularly reassessed for impact and omissions. A sustainable approach to anti-oppressive description means that we need to center people in all of our metadata practices and adapt our strategies for doing so over time. We welcome your feedback. You can reach us at a4blip@gmail.com.

## A Note on Language

Based on feedback from reviewers we have decided to capitalize the word Black when used in the context of
identity and race. Our decision was based on thoughtful consideration of Black archivists’ feedback, current style
guides, and approaches used by contemporary Black writers and journalists.<sup>[4](#myfootnote1) We have chosen not to use the term
African American because the archival materials that these recommendations apply to may describe Black people
outside the United States. We have decided not to capitalize the word white, in accordance with common practice
and contemporary style guides and because the capitalization of white is a practice commonly used by white
supremacists. However, our annotated bibliography entries refl ect the language conventions used by the authors of
the articles themselves, which occasionally deviate from those used throughout the rest of this document.

<a name="myfootnote1">[4]</a>: Elahe Izadi, “When to Capitalize ‘Black’ and ‘White,’” DCentric (blog), May 16, 2012, [http://dcentric.wamu.org/2011/10/when-to-capatalize-Black-and-white/;](http://dcentric.wamu.org/2011/10/when-to-capatalize-Black-and-white/) “White, white,” Th e Diversity Style Guide, ed. Rachele Kanigel, accessed 2019, https://www.diversitystyleguide.com/glossary/white-white/; Lori L. Th arps, “Th e Case for Black with a Capital B,” Th e New York Times, November 19, 2014, [https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/19/opinion/the-case-for-Black-with-a-capital-b.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/19/opinion/the-case-for-Black-with-a-capital-b.html); Gabrielle Foreman, Activists Sentiments: Reading Black Women in the Nineteenth Century (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2009).
